Source: https://www.imf.org/en/blogs/articles/2024/01/14/ai-will-transform-the-global-economy-lets-make-sure-it-benefits-humanity

AI Will Transform the Global Economy. Let’s Make Sure It Benefits Humanity.Chart of the WeekRegionsTopicsAuthorsArchiveIMF HomeCredit X-poser/Adobe StockCredit X-poser/Adobe StockEnglishالعربية中文españolрусский日本語françaisArtificial intelligenceAI Will Transform the Global Economy. Let’s Make Sure It Benefits Humanity.AI will affect almost 40 percent of jobs around the world, replacing some and complementing others. We need a careful balance of policies to tap its potentialKristalina GeorgievaJanuary 14, 2024
We are on the brink of a technological revolution that
could jumpstart
productivity, boost global growth and raise incomes around the
world. Yet
it could also replace jobs and deepen inequality.
The rapid advance of artificial intelligence has captivated
the world,
causing both excitement and alarm, and raising important questions
about
its potential impact on the global economy. The net effect is difficult
to
foresee, as AI will ripple through economies in complex ways. What we can
say with some confidence is that we will need to come up with a set of
policies
to safely leverage the vast potential of AI for the benefit of humanity.
Reshaping the Nature of Work
In a new analysis, IMF staff examine the
potential impact
of AI on the global labor market. Many studies have predicted
the
likelihood that jobs will be replaced by AI. Yet we know that in many cases
AI is likely to complement human work. The IMF analysis captures both these
forces.
The findings are striking: almost 40 percent of global
employment is
exposed to AI. Historically, automation and information
technology have
tended to affect routine tasks, but one of the things that sets
AI apart is
its ability to impact high-skilled jobs. As a result, advanced
economies
face greater risks from AI—but also more opportunities to leverage
its
benefits—compared with emerging market and developing economies.
In advanced economies, about 60 percent of jobs may be
impacted by AI.
Roughly half the exposed jobs may benefit from AI integration,
enhancing
productivity. For the other half, AI applications may execute key
tasks
currently performed by humans, which could lower labor demand, leading to
lower wages and reduced hiring. In the most extreme cases, some of these
jobs
may disappear.
In emerging markets and low-income countries, by
contrast, AI exposure is
expected to be 40 percent and 26 percent,
respectively. These findings
suggest emerging market and developing economies
face fewer immediate
disruptions from AI. At the same time, many of these
countries don’t have
the infrastructure or skilled workforces to harness the
benefits of AI,
raising the risk that over time the technology could worsen
inequality
among nations.
AI could also affect income and wealth inequality within
countries. We may
see polarization within income brackets, with workers who can
harness AI
seeing an increase in their productivity and wages—and those who
cannot
falling behind. Research shows that AI can help less experienced
workers enhance their productivity more quickly. Younger workers may find it
easier to exploit opportunities, while older workers could struggle to
adapt.
The effect on labor income will largely depend on the
extent to which AI
will complement high-income workers. If AI significantly
complements
higher-income workers, it may lead to a disproportionate increase
in their
labor income. Moreover, gains in productivity from firms that adopt AI
will
likely boost capital returns, which may also favor high earners. Both of
these phenomena could exacerbate inequality.
In most scenarios, AI will likely worsen overall
inequality, a troubling
trend that policymakers must proactively address to
prevent the technology
from further stoking social tensions. It is crucial for
countries to
establish comprehensive social safety nets and offer retraining
programs
for vulnerable workers. In doing so, we can make the AI transition
more
inclusive, protecting livelihoods and curbing inequality.
An Inclusive AI-Driven World
AI is being integrated into businesses around the world
at remarkable
speed, underscoring the need for policymakers to act.
To help countries craft the right policies, the IMF has
developed an AI
Preparedness Index that measures readiness in areas such as
digital
infrastructure, human-capital and labor-market policies, innovation and
economic integration, and regulation and ethics.
The human-capital and labor-market policies component,
for example,
evaluates elements such as years of schooling and job-market
mobility, as
well as the proportion of the population covered by social safety
nets. The
regulation and ethics component assesses the adaptability to digital
business models of a country’s legal framework and the presence of strong
governance for effective enforcement.
Using the index, IMF staff assessed the readiness of 125
countries. The
findings reveal that wealthier economies, including advanced and
some
emerging market economies, tend to be better equipped for AI adoption than
low-income countries, though there is considerable variation across
countries.
Singapore, the United States and Denmark posted the highest
scores on the
index, based on their strong results in all four categories
tracked.
Guided by the insights from the AI Preparedness Index,
advanced economies
should prioritize AI innovation and integration while
developing robust
regulatory frameworks. This approach will cultivate a safe
and responsible
AI environment, helping maintain public trust. For emerging
market and
developing economies, the priority should be laying a strong
foundation
through investments in digital infrastructure and a digitally
competent
workforce.
The AI era is upon us, and it is still within our power
to ensure it brings
prosperity for all.
—For more on artificial
intelligence and the economy, see the
December issue of Finance
& Development, the IMF’s quarterly magazine.
RecentArtificial intelligenceA文AI Needs More Abundant Power Supplies to Keep Driving Economic GrowthMay 13, 2025The power-hungry technology requires policies to help expand electricity supplies, incentivize alternative sources, and help contain price surgesArtificial intelligenceA文How Artificial Intelligence Can Boost Productivity in Latin AmericaMarch 20, 2025Some countries risk missing out on the full economic benefits of AI, but more formal jobs and expanded digital access can helpArtificial intelligenceHow AI Can Help Both Tax Collectors and TaxpayersFebruary 25, 2025New generative AI tools can redefine the relationship between governments and citizens, but strong leadership and safeguards are fundamental.ABOUT THE BLOGIMFBlog is a forum for the views of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) staff and officials on pressing economic and policy issues of the day.
The IMF, based in Washington D.C., is an organization of 191 countries, working to foster global monetary cooperation and financial stability around the world.
The views expressed are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily represent the views of the IMF and its Executive Board. Read MoreARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCEDIGITAL MONEYFINANCIAL SECTOR STABILITYGLOBAL ECONOMYFINANCIAL MARKETFISCAL AFFAIRSMONETARY POLICYPEOPLEIMF HOME PAGE© 2025 INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED